
+++
date = 2014-08-02T00:00:00.000Z


title = "Cron 101"
topics = [ "cron", "cli" ]

+++

cron is the daemon process that executes scheduled commands, crontab is the
program used to modify crontab files i.e. a per user file that contains
instructions for cron.

`/var/spool/cron` is the location of the root and user crontab files, which
should be modified through `crontab -e` command.

* `crontab -l` display crontab file.
* `crontab -r` remove crontab file.
* `crontab -v` display the last time you edited your crontab file.

Some Linux distributions also have `/etc/cron.{hourly,daily,weekly,monthly}`;
scripts inside those directories will be executed every hour/day/week/month with
root privilege.

You can change shell by specifying `SHELL=/bin/bash` in crontab file.

Cron passes a minimal set of environment variables to your jobs. You can set
your own `PATH` variable at the top of the script.

On a default installation the cron jobs get logged to `/var/log/syslog`.

`cron` will not catchup and run past queries.

## Crontab format

```
# .---------------- minute (0 - 59)
# |  .------------- hour (0 - 23)
# |  |  .---------- day of month (1 - 31)
# |  |  |  .------- month (1 - 12) OR jan,feb,mar,apr ...
# |  |  |  |  .---- day of week (0 - 6) (Sunday=0 or 7)
# |  |  |  |  |
# *  *  *  *  *   command
```

* `,` is used to specify a list e.g `1,4,6,8`
* `-` is used to spefiy ranges and they can be combined with lists e.g. `1-3,9-12`
* `/` character can be used to introduce a step e.g. `2/5` which means starting at 2 then every 5
* ranges and steps can be combined e.g. `*/5` starting at 0 then every 5
* `\` cannot be used to extend a command over multiple lines

Special declarations

* `@reboot` run once, at startup.
* `@yearly` run once a year, i.e. `0 0 1 1 *`
* `@annually` (same as `@yearly`)
* `@monthly` run once a month, `0 0 1 * *`
* `@weekly` run once a week, i.e. `0 0 * * 0`
* `@daily` run once a day, i.e. `0 0 * * *`
* `@midnight` (same as `@daily`)
* `@hourly` run once an hour, i.e. `0 * * * *`

## Check cron’s logs

Debian/Ubuntu

```
sudo grep CRON /var/log/syslog
```

Redhat

```
sudo grep CRON /var/log/messages
```

## Check that cron is running

```
pgrep cron
```

```
pidof cron
```

Eventually, `strace` the cron process to see what it's doing:

```
sudo strace -f -p `pidof cron`
```

## Examples

Run `command` at 12:11 on the first day of the month.

```
11 0 1 * * command
```

Run `command` at 6:15 on every day.

```
15 6 * * * command
```

Run `command` every hour

```
0 * * * * command
```

Run `command` at 00:30 on 1st day of January, June and December

```
30 0 1 1,6,12 * command
```

Run `command` at 20:00 on every weekday (Mon-Fri) but only in October

```
0 20 * 10 1-5 commnad
```

Run `command` at midnight on 1st, 10th and 15th of each month

```
0 0 1,10,15 * *
```



