
+++
date = 2015-06-13T00:00:00.000Z


title = "rsync 101"
topics = [ "rsync" ]

+++

[rsync][1] stands for remote sync, it’s an utility to synchronize (or copy) the files
and directories from one location to another. rsync uses incremental « update
» - an algorithm that minimizes the amount of data copied by only transfering
the differeneces between sets of files across the network connection.

## COPY/SYNC LOCALLY

    rsync -azhP dir1/ dir2

* `-a` option - it stands for « archive » i.e. it syncs recursively and preserves
symbolic links, special and device files, modification times, group, owner, and
permissions.
* `-z` option - it adds compression
* `-P` option - it combines the options `--progress` and `--partial`
* `-h` option - it outputs numbers in a human-readable format

## COPY/SYNC TO A REMOTE LOCATION

Pushing the contents of dir1 to a dir2 on a remote machine remote1.

    rsync -a ~/dir1 remote1:dir2

Pulling the contents of dir2 on a remote machine remote1 to a local directory
dir1.

    rsync -a remote1:dir2 dir1

## KEEP DIRECTORIES SYNCHRONIZED

In order to keep two directories synchronized, it's also necessary to delete
files from the destination directory once they are removed from the source. This
is not rsync default behaviour though, rsync does not delete anything from the
destination directory. `--delete` option can be used to overwrite this and allow
full directories synchronization.

    rsync -a --delete source destination

## OTHER OPTIONS

* `-n` option - it reports the actions it would have taken but `rsync` does not
transfer any files
* `--max-size` option - it tells `rsync` not to transfer files that are greater than
a specific size
* `--exclude` option - it tells `rsync` to exclude specified files or directories
(comma-separated list) located inside a directory being synchronized

## SYNC OVER A SPECIFIC SSH PORT

    rsync -azP -e 'ssh -p <port number> ' source destination

[1]: http://linux.die.net/man/1/rsync
