---
created_at: 2014-05-02
kind: article
publish: true
title: "Ansible 101"
tags:
- ansible
- 101
- devops
---

[Ansible][1] is an open-source software for infrastructure management i.e. configuring and managing computers. Ansible is agent-less: a single controlling machine manages nodes over SSH connection; those nodes do not require additional software nor any background daemons. It has minimal software requirements i.e. Python 2.4 or later. It uses [YAML][2] as a description language which makes it self-documenting and easier to read than custom DSLs (additional layer of abstraction). In result, it is easier to use than similar, but older tools such as Puppet, Chef or Saltstack.

## Install

You need Python 2.4 or later. The best way to install is through `pip` package manager.

```
pip install ansible
```

## Hands-on

Make a directory

```
mkdir foo && cd foo
```

Create an inventory file

```
# ~/foo/hosts
[local]
127.0.0.1
```

Create a playbook

```
# ~/foo/playbook.yml

- hosts: local
  user: root
  tasks:
    - name: install curl
      apt: pkg=curl state=present

    - name: write to a file
      shell: echo hello > /tmp/foo
```

Run the playbook (Debian/Ubuntu specific)

```
ansible-playbook -i hosts playbook.yml
```

## Concepts

__Playbooks__ are collections of steps, i.e. configuration policies to be applied to defined groups of hosts, written in YAML and executed in order they are written.

__Playbooks__ are declarative and idempotent while shell scripts are imperative. It’s difficult to replay a shell script because it is very hard to write idempotent commands. Contrarily, Ansible only performs the tasks in the playbook that need to be performed: if the condition is already satisfied, there's nothing to do.

``` hello.yml
---
- hosts: localhost
  connection: local
  vars:
    - foo: Hello
  tasks:
    - command: echo “{{foo}}”
```

An __inventory__ defines a list of hosts; they can be defined on a system level with `/etc/ansible/hosts` or with the environment variable `ANSIBLE_HOSTS=<path-to-inventory>`, or per invocation with `-i <path-to-inventory>` parameter.

An __inventory__ file can define host groups using square brackets. If you declare a host in the inventory by hostname, it must be resolvable either in your `/etc/hosts` file, or by a DNS lookup. E.g.

```
[webservers]
192.168.100.1 set_hostname=foo # how to set per-host variables.

[dbservers]
dbserver-1
```

__Modules__ control system resources: services, files, commands e.g. apt/yum, file/copy, command/shell/script, service, ec2, etc.

```
---
- name: Install Python PIP & boto library
  user: ubuntu
  sudo: true
  hosts: all
  tasks:
    - name: Install python-pip
      apt: pkg=python-pip state=latest

    - name: Install boto w/ PIP
      pip: name=boto state=latest
```

## Usage

### Task Mode

In task mode, an Ansible module command is executed on a target node. A module is specified with `-m` parameter along with its arguments specified with `-a` parameter.

```
ansible web -m copy -a “src=script.sh dest=/usr/bin/script owner=root group=root mode=0755”
ansible web -m service -a “name=nginx state=restarted”
```

Groups can be combined

* `A:B` designates the union of groups A and B
* `A:&B` designates the intersection of groups A and B
* `A:!B` designates the difference, all from A without those in B

```
ansible -m ping web
ansible -m ping web:db
ansible -m ping web:&db
ansible -m ping web:!db
```

### Playbook Mode

In playbook mode, commands are executed according to specified playbook. When Ansible runs a playbook, it will execute the tasks in the order they appear in that playbook - the process is meant to be repeated without differences.

For better organisation, a playbook should be composed of smaller, reusable parts. Those parts can be combined into a playbook either using `include` statement or with roles.

An `include` statement specifies a file with plays to include into that playbook.

```
# site.yml
---
- name: Install Python PIP & boto library
  user: ubuntu
  sudo: true
  hosts: all
  tasks:
    - include: install-python.yml
```

```
# install-python.yml
- name: install python-pip
  apt: pkg=python-pip state=latest

- name: install boot with PIP
  pip: name=boto state=latest
```

__Roles__ are built around `include` statement (file references handling and opinionated structure) and provide the best way to organise playbooks. They encapsulate configuration/management steps related to a single thing. In general, a role consists of the following subdirectories, "files", “vars”, "handlers", "meta", "tasks" and "templates”.


```
# site.yml
---
- name: Install Redis
  user: ubuntu
  sudo: true
  hosts: all
  roles:
    - redis
```

```
# roles/redis/tasks/main.yml
---
 - name: Add the Redis PPA
   apt_repository: repo='ppa:rwky/redis' update_cache=yes
 - name: Install Redis from PPA
   apt: pkg=redis-server state=installed
 - name: Start Redis
   service: name=redis state=started
```

### Loop-like abstraction

`with_item` allows to pass a list of elements into a module.

```
- name: install default packages
  apt: pkg={{ item }} state=installed
  with_items:
    - curl
    - vim
    - htop
```

### Private key

A private key used to log in into nodes can be specified with `—private-key` parameter.

```
ansible-playbook acme.yml --private-key=/home/smith/.ssh/acme.priv
```

[1]: http://www.ansible.com/
[2]: http://yaml.org/
